# Communities

## Tubers

The surface of Mars is crossed by many lava tubes, left
behind by ancient volcanic activity. Unlike lava tubes on
Earth, these tubes can be exceedingly large, with some being
several kilometers wide and hundreds of kilometers long.

With their openings sealed and pumped with breathable air,
suitable lava tubes can be converted into habitats for a
fraction of the cost of an equivalent space on the surface.

A habitable lava tube is naturally shielded from radiation,
and has a stable temperature and pressure: making it an
ideal place to live and work.

It takes a lot of work to convert a lava tube into a
habitat, and tubes must be carefully selected, because if a
tube collapses, the consequences can be disasterous. A
geologically stable and well-maintained tube, however, is
one of the safest places on Mars.

The residents of habitable tubes are called Tubers. They are
amongst the most prestigious communities on Mars. Tubes are
centers of tourism and administration.

A single tube can house thousands of people, and as long as
there is more tube, the habitable area can be expanded
relatively cheaply.

Every tube has a different political makeup, but larger and
more established tubes tend to favour local governance, both
within the tube and for Mars more generally.

## Domers

The Martian domes are the largest settlements on the Martian
surface. They are inflatable domed habitats that provide an
Earth-like environment for their inhabitants.

Due to their great expense, domes are primarily built by
wealthy corporations to house their workers, who are
mostly Earthers.

Domers mostly perform factory work, research, and
administration. Extractive labour is typically outsourced to
the resettled.

Domes are quick to build and relatively cheap, but they
cannot be expanded as easily as tubes or camps, which can
leave to overcrowding.

In general, Domers are Earthers who view Mars as a
workplace, and Earth as their home. They tend to oppose home
rule for Mars.

## Resettled

The Resettled are those transported to Mars as part of a
program designed to address hyperunderemployment on Earth by
sending people to Luna and Mars. It is technically
voluntary, although for most the other option is languishing
in poverty on Earth.

Most resettled people live in surface-based resettlement
camps, typically working in mining and fuel production.

Resettlement camps consist of many small habitats which open
onto the Martian atmosphere. They are very quick to assemble
and cheap and easy to expand. However, they are not
convenient places to live.

Resettled might not view Mars as their home, but they
usually have a poor opinion of Earth, and support Martian
home rule. They may lack the fierce independence of
homesteaders, and instead support a strong centralised
state.

## Homesteaders

A homestead is a small, self-sufficient habitat - typically
on the Martian surface. It typically consists of residential
space, a greenhouse, and a solar array.

Individual homesteads are self-sufficient in the basic
needs, but rely on trade with other homesteads and
settlements for things they can't produce themselves, such
as medicines or electronics.

Before the current resettlement program, there was a
short-lived homesteading program where the resettled were
given sufficient resources and training to establish
themselves. Some homesteaders are descendants of those
original settlers, while others originate in other
communities.

Homesteaders value their independence and are opposed to
centralised control, but they also value community,
particularly with other homesteaders or those they view as
fellow travellers. Homesteaders often form ad-hoc alliances
for cooperation and trade, or for other reasons.

However, homesteaders are not homogeneous. Some homesteaders
are just born into it, or forced into it by circumstance,
and have no ideological commitment to the life.

Still other homesteaders pursue isolation and
self-sufficiency not as a goal in itself, but a necessary
step towards some other goal - often the formation of a new
community along religious or philosophical grounds.

One goal of the initial homesteading program was to
experiment with different ways of living on Mars in the
so-called Thousand Flowers Campaign. Only a dozen
communities were established before the program was
cancelled. These communities and their descendants, now
often known as Thousands, are amongst the more eccentric
Martians.
