---
order: 0
---

# Introduction

## Setting

A post-apocalyptic high-fantasy world, now a low-fantasy
world. Thousands of years after the time of mighty
civilisations built on magic.

The old civilisations have all either died, disappeared, or
become violently isolationist. It's not always clear which
is which.

Ruins of the old world dot the landscape, filled with
treasures and magical devices, but also with traps and
ancient guardians. They range from crumbling castles, to
haunted ghost towns, to dungeons that delve into the
foundations of the world.

In the wilderness, magical animals and monsters roam free.

In the face of all these dangers, most people live in walled
towns surrounded by the farmland which sustains them. These
towns are, if they are to persist, are well-defended. Some
towns command the loyalty of powerful ruin guardians,
whether by magic, or some understanding.

From time to time, some people may find a forgotten spell or
artifact which gives them the power to build their towns
into fledgling empires, expanding across the land and
absorbing their neighbours. Inevitably these empires are
short-lived as they come up against a belligerent competitor
and use up their magical potential in conflict - or they
grow too arrogant and try to fully usurp the power of the
ancients.

## Scenario

The player character arrives on an island, the location of
an ancient dungeon. The ruins of a magical tower float above
the dungeon, marking its location.

Like many dungeons, near the bottom of this dungeon lies a
"dungeon core", a powerful artifact from the old times which
sustains and maintains the dungeon itself.

If captured and safely extracted, the core could be
repurposed to raise a great utopian city which would
recapture, for a time, a fraction of the glory of the old
world.

Between the player and the core are hundreds of levels of
dungeon.
