# Alternate history

## Geological

Unlike our Earth, this alternative Earth formed with very
few radioactive elements in its crust. Events otherwise
continued mostly as before.

The lack of radioactive elements limits subterranean
heating, which is a significant catalyst in the formation of
fossil fuels. Without this heat source, fossil fuels are
very slow to form.

Coal, gas, and oil were known since antiquity, but are too
rare to serve as an industrial society's fuel source. They
serve as curiosities and precursors to certain luxury goods.

This Earth did not have a Carboniferous era, since the name
refers to the large coal deposits which originate from this
time. On this Earth the corresponding era is the Riphean,
after the mythical Riphean mountains which are sometimes
identified with the Urals.

## Industrial revolution

In 1763, the Seven Year War ended. During the war, the
parties had developed their logistical infrastructure on
land and sea, and the manpower and infrastructure was now
available to be repurposed towards industrialisation.

The industrial revolution was powered by wood and charcoal.
Europe had been mostly deforested long ago. The supplies of
wood needed to power industry first came from British
America, Brazil, and the Russian Empire.

## Colonialism

The British retained their holdings in the North-East
Americas, whose vast forests were tremendously important to
Britain's industrial development. As Britain became
increasingly dependent on British American wood, the
colonies gained increasing political and economic power in
the empire. Spain retained its Western-American holdings.

To provide a buffer against the Spanish, Britain allowed
various indigenous tribes to hold territory in the
Appalachia, favouring particularly the Six Nations. In the
far North, however, Britain crushed the natives, many of
whom had sided with the French in the war.

The Ottomans, mostly locked out of the new world, instead
moved south into the Africa, towards the forests of . For
about a century, they were the only colonial power to show
any interest.

By 1890, the colonial powers have expanded into the far
east, starting with India, and eventually the so-called East
Indies.

## Airships

Airships were developed in the late 19th century. Henri
Giffard designed the first steam-powered airship in 1870.

Later, Solomon Andrews would develop the first modern aereon
design: an aircraft with wings which provide lift as long as
the aircraft is in motion.

This limitation is balanced by the increased range and speed
of these aereons, and the ability to shrink the balloon
down, since it no longer needs to provide as much lift. This
makes the airship a smaller target, an important feature in
war.

Alternatively, an airship's designer may make use of the
extra lifting capability to keep the balloon as it is, but
add heavy armour, producing the ironclad airship.

The latest development in airships are rotastats, airships
with rotors able, like conventional dirigibles, to hover on
the spot, but also to have the improved performance
characteristics of an aereon.

## Wingships

Another kind of aircraft is the wingship, powered by a
"ready motor", a kind of engine which burns wood gas and
from that drives a rotating shaft directly, rather than
through a steam boiler.

Ready motors can be much lighter than steam engines. Wings
along could not lift a steam airship, but they can lift a
wingship with a light ready motor in it.

Wood gas is hard to store and transport around compared to
wood, and tends to leak out of containers, so it is usually
extracted from wood in small quantities near the place they
are used.

Larger airships may carry a small retinue of winghships, and
will have a "gasifier" on board to generate their fuel from
their wood supplies. Wingships have impressive capabilities,
but they are short range vehicles, with flight times limited
to several minutes between fueling.

## Malaysian Theatre

The game begins in 1890. The Dutch and the British are in
conflict over control of the Malay archipelago. The
conflict sparks into war over the island of Borneo, pulling
in the local great powers of New Spain in the Philippines,
and French Indochina.
